- Hey, everyone out there on the live stream.
Thank you for being here.
We're just about to get started.
So throw some comments into the chat
and we'll try to make that part of the show.
So you guys ready?
- Yeah, let's do it.
- Carlton, Will, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
Again, welcome back, guys.
- Wasn't a thank you for having us.
You came on our show. - Yeah, thank you.
Yeah, you came on our show
and I was on your show three years ago.
So Carlton's first time on your show.
- Talk Python newbie.
- Yeah, it was great to have you on the show before, Will.
And we talked about Django then,
and I suspect it won't surprise people
with you and Carlton here that we may touch on Django.
- I think we've got to talk about Django a little bit.
- A little bit.
- Carlton, tell people who you are.
- Okay, so I'm Carlton.
I'm a Django fellow.
So what that means is I help to maintain the framework.
A framework the size of, oh, you've got me on Twitter there.
So I'm Carlton Gibson on Twitter and on GitHub
and numerous other places probably.
But a framework the size of Django's,
it just simply doesn't get maintained
on purely volunteer effort.
So there's a body called the Django Software Foundation,
which Will's on the board for.
He can tell you a bit about that in a second.
But they are a charitable foundation which,
well, they collect money from donations
from GitHub sponsors and you can donate
on djangoproject.com.
And then the main thing they do is they contract the fellows
which is myself and Maris Feliciak, who's my colleague now.
And we do that, I don't know, what do we do?
We triage the tickets, we do pull request review.
We do handle security issues, we handle the releases,
not least the alpha releases today.
So today, literally today, we released Django 3.2 alpha,
alpha one, which will be--
- Fantastic.
Is that the very first 3.2 release?
- Yeah, that's the first one.
So that's like, if you've got a Django project
and you've got CI, you download it now
and you run it on your CI
and you tell us all the things we broke.
Better before we released the final,
it's much better during the alpha pre-release period
than just after 3.2 final, you go, hey, everything's broken.
- Yeah, you really need people to test it now
before it's too late, right?
- Yeah, but yes, but it's quite exciting
because the last couple of weeks
have been building towards the feature-free.
So the alpha marks the feature-free.
So over the pre-release period now,
we'll merge bug fixes in the new features.
So anything that people find and report will fix
and get out before the final,
but there's no new features going into 3.2.
So on Thursday, just gone,
I branched the stable branch for 3.2,
which will be, that's Django 3.2,
and it will be that for the next three years
'cause the long-term release gets quite,
the long-term support release, which 3.2 is,
gets three years of support.
- Yeah, that's really great.
All right, we're gonna definitely have to come back to that,
but also welcome Will.
Tell everyone-- - Oh yeah, there I am.
- Real briefly, you were on the show a while ago
and we talked, I believe it was learning Django
we spoke about, right?
- I loved Django at the time,
so I'd written, I think, a couple books.
So I have three books,
Django for professionals and APIs,
and the last two years,
I've been a member of the Django Software Foundation board.
So there's about two who were voted in
who play a prominent role in the community
one way or another.
And then the board is seven people annually voted on
who manage Django itself, which is a nonprofit.
We'll talk about that later.
So yeah, and I have now a website, learndjango.com,
which is an online version of additional content.
But in addition to having a podcast with Carlton,
Django chat, since he's a fellow,
which is contracted by the board,
we have another touch point as if we didn't need more.
- Exactly, yeah.
So I was on your show a while ago and that was super fun.
I really enjoyed our conversation there.
And maybe just tell people quickly about your podcast.
What kind of stuff do you cover there?
Obviously Django, but where do they find it?
What do they cover?
- Okay, so we get people on from the community.
It's kind of an interview type basis.
We get someone on, it's fortnightly now.
We were doing it every week, but not like you, Michael,
we can't keep it up forever.
So we've gone fortnightly,
which has taken a bit of pressure off with COVID
and the kids off school and all of that.
But we get people who contributed to Django
or people who are using Django in their business
and talk about it.
So it's Django chat, it's chatting about Django.
- It's chatting about Django, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's chatdjango.com.
- And it's also, I think, recreating a little bit
of what you would have at a DjangoCon event.
So these are annual events.
So we started after I went to my first DjangoCon
and met Carlton and was like,
why can't I talk to people about Django more often?
And at the time there wasn't a Django podcast.
So yeah, we've gotten to interview
really my dream list of guests.
I mean, we had, actually I was just talking to someone else
who works at Stripe, which is still running on Sinatra,
which is a Ruby thing.
And I was like, yeah, yeah, I've talked to DHH
'cause he's came on our show.
So we talked about Rails versus Django.
We had Carl Myron, who's at Instagram,
was formerly DjangoCore.
All the, basically everyone,
almost everyone we'd wanna talk to
who's involved in Django is willing to come on
and share their story.
So I think it's a really nice connector
and educational for us too.
- I do as well.
And you're just sort of a sidebar for our show here.
Being all of us fellow podcasters,
I think it's really interesting the role that podcasts play
in keeping connections to the broader tech community
when we can't go anywhere.
I mean, even if you weren't typically going to conferences
or meetups, you could still go to work
and see other people, right?
It's just, for me, it took, first when COVID hit,
I was like, I'm just, I'm not traveling anywhere.
I'm not taking my kid to school or anything like that.
So there's no like natural place.
Here I'm stuck for 45 minutes.
I'm gonna just listen.
But as it's drawn on, I started to listen to shows,
especially with multiple people trying to,
it brings sort of a normalcy.
And I get to kind of hang out with these people,
even though they don't respond to me,
I still get to hang out with them.
And I think that's a really interesting societal thing
that's happening right now.
- Yeah, I think it's beneficial across the board.
I mean, probably like you all,
I listen to podcasts outside of tech as well.
And it's sort of like people I'd wanna sit in
on their conversations anyways.
So for me, it's probably my primary media consumption
aside from books.
- Yeah, yeah.
- But I mean, I'm not reading ancient Greek like Carlton.
Carlton has a PhD in all that.
So, so by comparison, my habits are,
yeah, but we should, I mean,
I think we were gonna talk about deployments.
- Everything was done, book is lowbrow.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
We were gonna talk about specifically deployments on Django.
I mean, we can go on and on about,
obviously all the intricacies of Django,
but I think suffice to say,
I'm an educator on the board and Carlton's a fellow.
So he makes the releases happen,
including 3.2 alpha, which just dropped today.
And I guess you mentioned LTS.
So that's confusing to non-Django people.
So since having fellows like Carlton,
Django has a pretty rapid release cycle
where it's every nine months or so.
So there was 3.0, 3.1, 3.2 this December.
I think Carlton is 4.0.
And then one of those is a long-term service release.
So that'll last two and a half years.
So if that-- - Is it three years?
- Is it three years?
Yeah, it's on, there's a link on the Django project site.
So that's a way that, so Django doesn't really have,
it's rare to have breaking changes these days,
but the LTS is designed to help people
who can't keep up with that cycle stay up to date.
Though we have a lot of podcasts and opinions
about why you should always stay up to date
and it's worth it.
Because that's one of the most fair things you can do.
Because as Carlton mentioned, there's bug fixes constantly.
So it'll be, there's 3.1.1, 3.1.2,
there'll be 3.2, then the 3.2.1 a month later or so.
So stay up to date on it.
- I'm a big advocate of, if you possibly can,
get on the latest major release.
So you don't, like hanging out,
historically the long-term release was really,
the LTS release was really important
because there were breaking changes, right?
In each major version of Django, there were new things
and it was difficult to keep,
but that's not the case anymore.
It's really easy to update.
So I'm a big advocate of that.
Now, and then when I talk to fellow people
in the Django community, they're like,
"Well, you know, I work in the real world
"and you can't always keep up on the latest major version."
So for those folks, then the LTS is a really good option
because it's once every three years, you know it's coming.
- Yeah.
- You get a six month window of overlap
of support.
So the old LTS gets six months of security release
after the release of the new LTS
and that's your window to update.
- Well, I think that running and maintaining software
built upon frameworks like Django,
it falls into two categories for me.
It falls into, here's something that we have a team
or at least somebody dedicated to owning this project
and we care about its ongoing life.
And then we have the ones that are the,
oh, please don't touch it.
And the, oh, please don't touch it is,
we've long since stopped developing that.
Maybe the person who developed it left,
but it's still important and we don't wanna break it.
It's working right now, but if you touch it
and you break it, you've now adopted it.
You know what I mean?
Like it's that thing that just--
- It's like if you break the build.
- Yes, but worse 'cause it's legacy build, right?
It's like, so to me, I feel like,
that please don't touch it side,
the LTS make perfect sense for them.
- Yeah, entirely, entirely.
The way I like to think of it is,
is this the thing that you're feasibly
going to add new features to?
And if you're feasibly going to add new features to,
then you should be on the latest major version.
And because it's once every eight months,
you need to allocate a day or two to keep up,
to fix, download the new version, run the test suite,
see the deprecation warnings, fix the deprecation warnings,
you know, maybe you have to wait a couple of weeks
for a dependency to update and then you can push forward.
And that's once every eight months, that process.
And if you're adding new features, if it's a live project,
ideally you'd be there.
But yes, if there's something which you just need
to keep running for the long run,
you know, you could do that much less frequently.
- Right, but it allows people who have that,
please don't touch it.
But oh, there's a security problem.
You know, if there's no LTS and there's a security problem,
then not only do they have to figure out
how to redeploy the fix, they've got to say,
"Well, we didn't touch it for three years
and it doesn't quite work the same."
So then you get into the discussion of,
well, what's the risk?
Will they really?
It's just Java swing.
I mean, come on, what's the problem, right?
How bad could that go?
You know, like the entire world.
- It's a technical debt, isn't it?
I mean, especially now that we're in Python 3 world,
Dango was part of that.
It's really beyond the security thing.
It's also all the ecosystem around Dango,
the third party packages.
Like a lot of times, if you look at their project
that says, "I can't update," why can't you update?
They did two things.
They're using a third party package,
which falls into that, you know,
touch it, you broke it situation.
Or they did something custom at one point.
They went off the guardrails and, you know,
the bill comes due.
I mean, it's so tempting.
- Actually, I wanna, speaking of going off the guardrails,
quick note that Dango just passed Flask to Stars,
which is a really poor metric of popularity,
but nonetheless, we'll take it.
Because Flask is very easy to, you know,
spin up a couple API endpoints,
and boom, you're using Flask.
That's a very different thing.
That's like, you know, as DHH would say,
that's a Lego versus the Lego truck
that is a framework like Dango.
And anecdotally, a lot of places use Flask,
but in terms of a big site that's all Flask,
that's much less common than all Dango.
- Yeah, well, I was thinking about this this morning,
and it, you know, Flask and Dango are pretty neck and neck
in terms of popularity, right?
They're not-- - On GitHub.
- On GitHub, yeah, yeah, sure.
There's these metrics and popularity,
there's like all over the map.
So one of the thoughts I had though,
is the people that use Flask,
and this is not a knock against Flask, I like it.
But one of my sort of impressions is,
if I just need to, like you said,
just create a couple APIs,
and we're just gonna get something going real small
and simple, and it's just roll.
Like, those people are not as invested
in the ecosystem and the framework
as I feel like the Django folks are.
I feel like the Django folks,
it's a more encompassing part of their development
experiences or development lifecycle.
Like, Django feels more part of the project
when people adopt it and love it.
- Yeah.
- I don't know, what do you guys think about that?
- Yeah, I mean.
- I mean, it has to be, right?
You need a dozen apps to use Flask.
And actually, I hope that we get David Lord on
to talk about Flask, 'cause he's at DjangoCon.
So I mean, it's not a,
I don't mean to say there's a competition between the two,
but they serve different purposes,
I would say, Carlton, right?
- Yeah, different styles as well.
Like, you know, if you want to put together something,
why not Flask?
But I mean, I've been using Django for so long now
that even if I just need to spin up two endpoints,
it's much quicker for me to do that in Django
than it is to go and get a supposedly micro framework
and work out, you know, how am I supposed to use this?
- In fact, you have a whole talk on this, Carlton, I think,
from DjangoCon. - I do, yeah, no,
DjangoCon US, what, last year.
- Actually, I have a, we could put a link in the notes.
I have, I made up a repo with the code,
'cause you didn't provide code of, you can--
- It's on the slide, so you can just get the slide.
- Oh yeah, well, I think I tweaked a couple things,
but yeah, you can have a single file Django project
the same way you can for Flask,
because a lot of times that whole old world comparison
will lead people to assume that Flask
is much less complicated than Django,
and it's a little bit less, but it's a little,
it's more around to how it's structured,
which is the point of Carlton's talk, basically.
- Yeah, so the talk was called
How to Use Django as a Microframework,
or something like that, and it was about
the base HTTP handlers, the kind of,
that real core of the framework,
and those, you know, I put up a few examples
from different frameworks, like Flask,
and an old example, and Starlet,
you know, async microframework from Tom Christie.
- And then, you know, for people who, sorry.
Yeah, for people who don't necessarily
live and breathe the web stuff like the three of us do,
give them a quick definition of microframework
before you go on.
- Well, in the talk, I was like, you know,
what is a microframework?
And I think the answer is--
- Yeah, I'm asking you,
'cause I don't wanna put my foot out there.
- Right, but the answer I came up with was,
it's got a great hello world, right?
- Yeah, okay, sure.
- Like, you know, it's just a term,
but I think the idea is that it's easier
to contrast it with like Rails or Django.
Rails and Django, they come with the batteries included,
with everything you need, you know.
- You've got an ORM, you've got database,
you've got migration, all that stuff, yeah.
- All that stuff.
With your microframework,
you perhaps get the core HTTP handling,
and that's about it,
and then you have to go and find a forms library.
Okay, I found a forms library.
And then you have to pull in an ORM or a database,
okay, I'll use that one.
And, you know, so there are node full batteries
included frameworks, like Happy is very good,
it's got everything you need.
But like the classic nodes example is,
oh, you know, I get Express,
and I pull in this thing for passing URLs,
and that thing, you know, so there's a continuum.
But microframeworks fit more towards that,
you know, you put the pieces together yourself,
whereas a batteries included framework like Django,
you get not everything, but a lot in the box.
- Right, so your experience is more Django pieces,
Django building blocks, then a little Flask,
a little SQL, a little this, a little that.
- Yeah, definitely, and I've been doing it so long now
that I'd struggle to break out of that.
I just, you know, I throw in a bit of style
or a bit of fast API,
see what's going on with the new frameworks,
every new framework that comes out,
they'll always give it a run.
And then my question is,
well, okay, well, what can we learn from that for Django?
- Yeah, I think what you can learn from that
is I can be an RSA.
- Go ahead, Will.
- I just think a truly large site,
if you ask them like what language and frameworks you use,
it's like everything, you know, I mean,
just because of the needs of a massive site,
it ends up being, it's hard to say
that it's truly one thing.
I mean, Instagram is still, has pieces of Django in it,
but you know, it's, at that scale, it's its own thing.
And I think, you know, the micro frameworks
are really good for doing that.
There's also, this might be a pessimistic take,
but I've heard people make that a micro framework
allows you to switch the complexity
from individual developers who may be sharing you
just as much up to your upper level,
because they only can touch a tiny part of the monolith.
So they can, in a way, do less damage.
That's actually an organizational argument
for micro frameworks is that only the software architects
or the senior people fit it all together.
- They weave the pieces or they build the puzzle
or whatever.
- But you know, there's something to that, I guess,
especially if your testing suite isn't
as good as it could be.
- Yeah, I don't know.
I think there's an interesting conversation
about like monolith type software style versus not.
I'm actually a big fan of the monolith style.
Like all my attempts to break it into little pieces,
at least in the microservices,
which is not the same as micro framework,
but I always feel like I've quadrupled
my deployment complexity to half my software complexity.
And I'd rather manage half as much software complexity
as twice as much deployment complexity.
- Right, like if you were part of a five person team
in a large organization assigned to fix something
and you're just like, there's no way we can get done
within this monolith, but like, oh,
we could spin something up and solve the problem
and move on, you know,
play that by the lot.
I think, you know, or an individual project,
you get fancy and you customize Django
or you use a third party package that is out of date
or maybe you shouldn't use it and you have the same issue.
- Yeah, I don't know, like, okay,
we're segwaying slightly back into the deployment topic,
which ostensibly we came to talk about.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- I think the thing with microservices, right,
so if you've got a massive corporation,
you can't have all the things going on, right, in one team.
So you need to segment it somehow
and then you can define service boundaries
and it starts to make sense.
But when, then all the tech blogs become
about microservices and how this is the way.
And then learners come along and they're like,
well, I've got to build my thing using microservices.
It's like, no, that's really not a good move,
but wherever the blog posts, not for, you know,
and now the pendulum swings back and, you know,
there are lots of posts now about how monoliths
are making return and how they're the way to go.
And so hopefully the beginners come and see those posts.
But when you're learning and everyone's saying,
oh, you must use a microservice architecture,
it's like, hang on.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, because the people who are knowledgeable
are writing about their day job.
They're not writing about spinning up a Django app
on a weekend.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Which is possible and you can deploy it too,
which we could, should we get into that deployment?
- Well, I, you know, I do want to just point out,
I think this might be the RFA that I read before.
And like, yeah, you're not Google, you're not LinkedIn,
you're not Facebook, you're not Netflix.
There are people who actually,
that's an inaccurate statement about.
There's plenty of people that work at those companies.
But like you said, Carlton, the people who come along,
they see these companies who they respect and say,
they must be doing it right.
And so often with these deployment stories,
with these design patterns, you know,
should you have like separate caching servers
that run like something like Redis?
Yes, you should.
No, you shouldn't.
And that's the right answer at the same time,
but with the context that you need, right?
Are you trying to run 10,000 servers
and let 500 people work on this project?
Or are you two people trying to do a startup?
Like those are not the same trade-offs
and balances you want to make, right?
- Right, yeah.
And it depends as well on your model.
So one example that I really like is Stack Overflow.
Now they're built entirely on the Microsoft stack.
So they've got a SQL server and they're using .NET
and all, but the basic point is
they've got a really big database one.
And then, you know, a few worker processes
in front of those and that's it.
It's a classic monolith.
And they're one of the biggest sites on the internet.
And yet they're able to do it.
- They're incredibly fast.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And yeah, exactly as fast as you could ever want.
Okay, they do it in this kind of monolith,
old school styles, you know, vertical scale,
make it just bigger.
No, I don't spin out parallels, just make the thing bigger.
Buy a bigger database server.
So that's, you're not gonna be bigger
than Stack Overflow, right?
And then another example we have--
- And when you are, you'll reevaluate it anyway.
Whatever you do now is not gonna solve that problem, yeah.
- But you're not gonna be bigger than Stack Overflow.
And then we had another example, which was Dr. Indermaan.
They came on, Matt Lehman from those,
from Dr. Indermaan came on Django chat recently.
And he was, they've got a more containerized approach
to it, but the thing is, they're doing peer-to-peer
communication between many simultaneous
peer-to-peer video communications,
'cause Dr. Indermaan is like a telemedicine, right?
- Right, right, like I need to book
a video appointment with my doctor.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Okay, exactly.
- But they've got so many of those processes
needed to be spun up that they need something
which scales out and then back down again very easily.
So they've got a kind of more modern,
more, you know, a cooler technology.
They're not as big as Stack Overflow probably
in terms of raw talent, raw traffic,
but they need that flexibility of architecture.
- That's what we always think, right?
We say it depends, that's our tagline.
- Yeah, it depends.
- Yeah.
- Django chat.
- It depends, exactly, that's your subtitle.
I do think context, right?
When people talk about design patterns,
deployment, architecture, there's,
those are always within a silent,
not mentioned most of the time context
in which that makes sense.
And you gotta decide, are you in that context?
Are you not?
- Yeah, yeah, no, Intel.
- Yeah.
- Now, before we move on.
- I was just saying, what problems are you trying to solve?
Like, you can't innovate everywhere.
Like, there's so many pieces to a website.
Do you wanna innovate on deployment?
Not until you're, you know, Instagram, I don't think.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely.
No, well, I think that's a great point.
And, you know, it's, when you're small,
the most important thing is adding features
and going quick, right?
When you get bigger, the most important thing
is to not go down, right?
If random little project that is like an ordering service
for a restaurant in Milwaukee,
if it goes down for half an hour, it's not ideal,
but it's not the end of the world.
If Google goes down for a half hour, people really notice.
You know, it's like front page news type.
So it's just a totally different thing.
Now, before we move on to a more deployment stuff,
and we're kind of in there, I do,
just before we get away too far,
maybe we could touch real quickly
on some of the new features that are coming in 3.2
and like the Django 3 stuff that you guys are excited about.
- Yeah, maybe, can you start with just 3 in general,
Carlton, 'cause I think that makes 3.2 have more context.
- Well, okay, so, but 3 introduced,
3 began the process for making Django async, right?
So we added, so historically, Python has this,
the WSGI, the web service gateway interface.
So Django is a WSGI framework.
Flask is a WSGI framework.
It was this standard so that application servers
could talk to protocol servers,
which could talk to the internet without, you know,
each framework having to have its own protocol server.
So Gunicorn is a WSGI server, and it can speak to Flask,
and it can speak to Django.
- Right, you can use that, and I can use micro WSGI,
and we don't have to coordinate or do anything.
It just happens.
That's because of the WSGI or WSGI thing, right?
- Yes, so that's the standard.
And so in order to make things async,
there's this thing called ASCII,
which is the asynchronous web gateway interface.
I don't know.
- Yeah, I don't know.
I don't really, yeah.
- Anyway, it's not WSGI, it's ASCII.
So first of all, Django 3.0 brought in an ASCII handler.
So it wasn't async at all,
but you could run it under an ASCII server.
And then 3.1 brought in actual async views,
and you can define an async def view,
and you can use, I don't know, HTTPX,
which is like an asynchronous HTTP client.
- Like request.
- Yeah, so request.
- What about, what's the ORM story?
Does that support async in a way yet?
- Right, no, so that's not there yet.
So this is something that will develop
over probably over the course of the Django 4 lifestyle.
So there's plans and there's thoughts,
and we need to get to the point where you,
with the ORM, where you can,
down to your kind of filter call.
So things like filter, they can be totally synchronous
because they don't actually do any IO.
They don't actually hit the database.
But when you then go, right, I've got my query set
and I'm gonna iterate it,
and I'm gonna fetch the objects from the database.
We need that bit,
even if the actual connection is running a thread
or whatever, we need that bit to be fully async.
And then Django will feel async as it is.
At the moment, if you write an async view in Django,
you kind of have to say, well, I'm not gonna touch the DB.
I'm not gonna, I mean, you can wrap the ORM
in a sync to async wrapper,
but you kind of lose the point of that.
- Yeah, yeah, but that's coming, right?
- Yeah, so Andrew, yeah, so Andrew Golden,
who's driving this effort,
he gave a talk at DjangoCon Europe
about the structuring of this
and what it's gonna look like.
And it's like, yeah, that makes sense.
This is gonna work.
And we don't have to get,
what's nice is we don't have to get async
all the way down to the very bottom
because we can run the actual,
we can sort of hand off the actual database connection
in a thread executor,
but from the outside of the ORM, it will look async.
And then you can stream out your content records
of maximum throughput as you want to, that kind of thing.
- Yeah, well, the fact that you can already do
external APIs, and if you're going down
the microservice path, you can do your microservice calls
with HTTPS and await those, that's already a huge step.
- Yeah, exactly.
So this is, so without, and this works,
what's amazing about the way Andrew is just absolute hero,
but he put it together in such a way
that you can run this with a WSGI service.
You're running Django 3.1 with Gunicorn,
like you always have.
And you think to yourself,
I just need to make a couple of API calls,
but they're quite slow and I want to make them in parallel.
You can do that just by writing an async def call
and then making the parallel calls using HTTPS.
And it just works.
And Django does all the rest for you and adapts it,
and you didn't have to change your application server.
You didn't have to do, it's just like, yeah, it's async.
- One of the challenges, if you're talking to the database,
is you say, okay, fine, the bottleneck was we were waiting
at the web server level, at the Django level,
and then we're going to push that down to the database.
We're going to just make all that async.
All of a sudden, all the pressure is now on the database,
which can be a problem.
But if you're talking external APIs,
you're now pushing the pressure onto the internet,
which is way scalable.
- Yeah, and it's always going to scale more than you, right?
You know, you're not going to need
that many client requests probably.
- Yeah, yeah.
Also David Smith out there says 3.2 will be a great release.
You guys have done a great job getting many patches over.
Yeah, for sure.
- Thank you, David.
- Super.
We were working really hard.
It was, we had two longer lists and we got,
you know, one we had to bump for Django 4.0,
but the rest we got in, so we were very pleased.
- Okay, so 3.0, async and await, this is a big deal.
- And three, yeah, and so what's, yeah,
and so those are the big features of 3.0.
And then what's coming in 3.2,
it's got various other bits and bobs.
You can customize primary key.
So traditionally, they've just been autofilled,
which is in 32.
Well, eventually, you know,
you get 22 billion of those or something, you can run out.
So you can now customize that for big in,
and over the next couple of releases, you know,
major releases, we will make the default big in,
because that's probably what it should be in 64,
'cause then you're never going to run out of primary keys.
But that's something that, you know, came in.
The big sites run into that,
especially if you start creating, I don't know,
events, an event log.
You know, a site can generate a lot of events
and they can add up quickly, you know,
so anyway, that's important.
Functional index is in the ORM,
so you can create an index on an expression,
like, you know, that these were greater than,
or that the sum of this was,
and then you can query on those at full speed,
because they're indexed.
That's a really big--
- Oh, really, so you can do a query,
like the sum of the orders of this,
the customer is greater than $100,
and that's a relation.
- Yeah, and then you can create an index on that value.
And you've been able to do that in raw SQL,
or, you know, any amount of time,
but that's now exposed at the ORM level,
and that's nice.
- That's awesome.
Yeah, and for people who are doing reporting,
or that kind of thing, it's, yeah, that's massive.
- And then we've got, I don't know,
a new memcache backend for the cache.
We've got, you know, updating the API
for using the admin for nice decorator API
for creating various admin customizations.
We've got themes in the admin.
We're gonna ship a dark theme.
- Yeah, that's a big one for,
people will see right away,
and it's to, 'cause the Django admin could use a refresh,
and there's been all sorts of third-party ways
to customize it, but now be built in a bit more.
- That'll be cool.
- There's all sorts.
In the blog post for the author,
I described it as a mess, but of new features,
and that's exactly what it is.
But what's nice is it's not,
there aren't, apart from Async, which is coming,
there aren't any new major features in Django, right?
It's 15 years old.
It's rich and mature and largely feature-complete,
but each major release, each eight months,
it always amazes me when we're drawing together
the final release notes,
how much depth and extra, like,
substance there is in the features
that we've managed to add,
and that have been contributed
over that eight-month period.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
- I don't have anything to add, Carl.
- Yeah, well, one thing I did wanna,
one thing that comes to mind,
so I feel like you're capturing
much of the modern Python awesomeness.
One other area that's, I think, interesting,
I have no idea what your plans are around it,
but maybe you could just give us your thoughts,
is type hints and type annotations.
- Yep.
- That's difficult for us.
- Carl, about that a little bit.
- Yeah, I mean, that's difficult for us,
because Django, I mean, if you take the old one,
it's super dynamic.
And there's an amazing project down at Django Stubs
where they've got stub files,
and they've got, you know, done a super job,
and it really does work well.
So if you load up VS Code or PyCharm these days,
you get very good autocomplete
around things like Django model field definitions.
And that's all powered by Django Stubs.
- Yeah.
- But you also-- - But you probably have
type hints underneath, right?
- Yeah, yeah, it totally is.
A year or so ago, there was some discussion
about whether we would make those inline hints
in Django itself.
And the technical board at the time said no,
because we need the typing technology
to evolve a little bit further in Python itself
before Django can jump on it,
jump on and say, "Look, we endorse
"this particular technology."
There is various ways of doing it,
and various type hinting, type checkers,
and various, and so, say we favored mypy,
which is obviously the endorsed one,
but what about the others?
You know, we can't support them all,
and they might change-- - Hi, right,
and all the different various initiatives, yeah.
- Yeah, and we can't take it out once it's in.
The thing with, the reason why people love Django
is 'cause it's super stable.
You know, you write a site five years later,
you don't really have to do very much to keep it going.
And so the technical board at the time said,
"No, we're not gonna bring those type hints into Django,
"but that will be reviewed.
"You know, we'll look at it again in a little while's time."
One thing I will say about typing,
in all the peps it says, "Type hints are to remain optional.
"They're not meant to be compulsory,
"even by convention," right?
And I do feel maintaining Django,
a certain pressure to have them.
I do worry that that optionality of type hints
is perhaps undermined a little bit
in the day-to-day development.
I'm not sure.
'Cause I also code in Swift, right?
Which is a fully statically typed.
- Yeah, Swift is pretty strong in its syntax.
Like you can't even null out objects.
Even if they could be, right?
If they're not allowed to be optional explicit.
There's a lot of interesting stuff
happening in the Swift type.
- Yeah, I mean, Swift is a fantastic language,
but there's no option, right?
It's type hints or it's type annotations all the way.
And then when I come back to Python
after a few hours of that, I'm like,
"Oh, this is so great." - I know.
You know, the thing that I really,
the comparison that I make a lot
is between TypeScript,
which is type annotations for JavaScript,
and Python type hints.
And I always walk away from TypeScript
feeling like, "Ah, that was way harder
"than it should have been.
"Why was it so frustrating and fighting me?"
Whereas in Python, you might get some squigglies
'cause you didn't quite define something just right,
or it wasn't defined at all.
But then it just, it carries on, right?
Whereas things that are completely,
it must work within this context,
they can become challenging,
especially the reason I bring up TypeScript
is the stuff that it brings in
is not necessarily typed, just like Python.
Whereas Swift is end-to-end,
it's all from scratch under that same system,
so it's coherent.
But bringing in, say, jQuery into TypeScript,
like there's no TypeScript jQuery.
I know there's like stubs you can put on and whatnot,
but like that kind of stuff is more Python-like.
And so I think it's pretty interesting.
- Yeah, and Django's in that very much in that boat
where it was never written with type-ins in mind.
- Yeah, of course, they didn't exist.
- If you look at Django stubs, it's quite awesome,
but a lot of the things are like string or any.
And it's like, but that's horrible, right?
You don't want to write that every single time.
So that's an issue.
And then another thing I see, which I'm not sure about,
sometimes they make a type like a model,
the Django model admin, they make it a generic
that takes the model type,
which tells you what it's the admin of.
And I remember, and I look at that.
- You're like back to C++ templates or something, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And I see where they're going with that.
And it's amazing what they've been able to do there.
But I remember coding Objective-C UI table view, say.
And what you would always do is you get your object,
your row class in from the UI table view delegate
where you're getting a list of cells, right?
So like a list of email messages.
And you'd immediately cast it to the type you wanted
so that you knew what you were dealing with.
And in a way, when I get something back
from a model admin method,
I'm quite happy to write colon, model name,
to tell the editor what it's meant to be,
to tell the type checker what it's meant to be.
And then for the rest of the method, I get the autocomplete.
- And you probably don't put any more type hints
'cause it's just now flows.
And I agree, it's so good at like allowing you
to generate code incredibly fast if the tool supports it.
One quick comment or thought that before we move on,
this having types around the ORM is really interesting
'cause all the big ORMs seem to do the same basic flow.
You know, I'm thinking, you know, Django ORM, SQLAlchemy,
even NoSQL ones like Mongo Engine, which I use,
they all have a class which has the columns
defined as descriptors.
So at definition time, they create the tables
or the collections.
And then at runtime, they become the scalar versions
of the thing they say they are, right?
An integer column is now actually an integer.
So what I've done when I define the model class
is say like name colon str equals string column.
And so the Python thinks it's all the types
are actually what I said, the primary types,
like in the model, and then the underlying ORM
can do what it needs to do.
But, you know, the rest of my code is like,
oh, that's a float column right there, or float field.
That's been really helpful.
I don't know, I haven't run into any problems doing that,
but it's been pretty helpful.
- Yeah, I mean, the thing that brings to mind,
well, there's data classes, right?
Which they brought in in 3.7 or 3.8.
And then Pydantic is the other exciting thing.
So you define a model, call it a model,
with exactly this, it's like field name type
with an annotation string or int or whatever.
And that works really well.
And I can imagine us generating Django ORM models
from that kind of thing.
But then you end up needing options.
Like is it nullable or is it required?
What validators does this field have?
And then it starts, when you start to add validators,
it starts to look almost like what we've got now.
I mean, Pydantic's got one good advantage.
In raw serialization speed, it's very fast.
So that's something we can learn.
But the short answer is, I don't know,
but it's exciting times.
- It's very exciting times.
All right, let's talk really quickly
about maintaining your content
or things that you generate.
Like you guys all write articles, books,
do online stuff, even podcasts.
So 3.2 is out.
You know, what broke?
Like real quickly, Will, maybe you wanna just talk about
what you've been doing to, you know,
- Yeah, there's a reason why there's
very few up-to-date Django books
because the release cycle of every nine months
doesn't overlap with the traditional publisher cycle.
So for me, I mean, I'm on version,
I think five for most of the books.
So I was on 1.10 or 1.11.
So it's sort of like writing the book again.
Every time I basically go through from scratch
and 'cause all the code is linked to the text.
Because I'm self-published, I can do all that.
I have my flow down.
So really it's, I have a kind of a list of new features
I know that are in there.
So I'll play around with them to make sure
that things don't break.
And then I'm constantly emailing with readers.
So I have feedback on kind of what works and what doesn't.
So half the new features are fixing things so it's smooth.
And then half just making the text.
So at this point, I feel pretty good
about the flow of all three.
And people will say, what about this?
And maybe I can explain it a little bit better.
I added, I mean, so for 3.1 added in the beginner's book,
I really wanted to have proper deployments,
but not go as deep as I do in the professional book.
So I did introduce environment variables
and showed, I think, a pretty elegant way
to get environment variables and to have some lockdown
for the deployed site.
Whereas before in beginners, it was just
sort of like the local version, which is pretty even,
was what you deployed because it was more
about getting something up.
But I was able to introduce environment variables.
We could talk about that more.
There's a third-party package, that's great.
So that's always the tension for me, is showing and telling.
Like I want to explain everything,
but I don't want to overwhelm people.
And so that's part of the thing I have to think about for 3.1.
So I don't know--
>>I think also for Django being so stable,
at least you can say all the stuff is still the same.
There's just new features we haven't mentioned.
Or a new way maybe is better, but as opposed to,
this does not work anymore.
>>Well, it's the difference between what
trips the professional programmer and someone who's new.
So for example, in 3.1, the pathlib
was added when you create a new Django project.
The settings.py file, which is the default settings,
the way the routes are done is a little bit different.
Like a two-minute stack overflow thing
for someone who's used to using Django or breaking stuff.
But that can completely derail a beginner.
So there's usually a couple things like that.
And so in that case, I have a dedicated blog post
because I knew that was coming.
Just this morning, I got more questions around it.
So that's sort of the thing that's fun for me,
is figuring out how do I be compassionate
to the true beginners, but [INAUDIBLE]
or more further along.
>>Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
>>Oh yeah, so it's a lot of work to do.
I don't know how you could do it with traditional mobile.
>>Yeah, I don't either.
I was just dealing with some GitHub issues
on some folks who are having trouble
because a mismatch of pip upgrades and other packages.
And it's just how it goes.
>>Real quick, John from the live stream
is really excited about the admin themes.
So that's really cool that it's going to come along.
>>Yeah, they add up to greatness.
I think that's-- I love it.
>>Yeah, that's a great, great thing.
All right, let's spend some time--
we talked a lot about deployment already,
which is why I've been dancing around a bit.
But let's go ahead and talk about deployment.
So when I create a web application with Django
or really honestly with Flask or anything,
I've got a cool app, but web apps are not generally
meant for the individual.
They are meant to go on the internet and be amazing
and connect things and allow other people to do stuff.
And that's a huge gap, right?
So maybe I've just learned how to do Django.
You just talked about your beginner's book, Will.
And I finally got that one page that wouldn't show
and the database stopped crashing when I did that one query
because I checked for none now and it's all good.
Wait, I have to learn Linux and I have to become an admin?
And you're like, what the heck just happened?
So how do you guys approach that?
What do you tell that person?
>>Yeah, first of all, hand on shoulder, I feel you.
Because it's just-- there's this massive deployment gap.
We've got the Django tutorial.
We've got the Django girls tutorial.
We've got the Django REST framework tutorial.
People have done those.
They've got their app together.
They've come up with some ideas.
They've learned a teeny bit of JavaScript to make it a bit better.
And now put it online.
And exactly this, I've got to learn Linux.
Oh my word.
>>Well, yeah, among other things.
I mean, it's two things, right?
I think like when I think about this--
well, there's two ways to think about it.
One is making it environment-friendly, which we can talk about.
And then there's the specifics of, do I do it on a VPS?
Do I do it on a pass?
So those are two separate things.
The first one, I think we can generalize.
And Django has some good notes on that.
The second one is sort of a deep end of opinion, I guess.
Though I'm in favor of-- like, I use Heroku.
I'm a big fan of platforms.
If somebody had something that hosted AWS for Django, I would use that.
>>Well, yeah.
I mean, so-- and I'm just going to throw it in here now.
I'm working on an app for this exact problem.
It's called Button.
It's btn.dev.
And the idea is to be able to spin up a small environment for this exact,
I just want to get my app online use case without you having to become a sysadmin expert.
>>Yeah.
So the spectrum looks like, to me, pass, right?
Platform as a service, which you said you like Heroku, and there's other options as well.
Then I think maybe Button is even before that.
I'm not entirely sure, like, in terms of--
>>So, OK.
So let me jump in.
You've got the platforms, you've got Heroku, which is there at one end.
And that's kind of like, they'll run your app, but they don't-- that's it, right?
Or you can run another worker instance, but then you say to yourself, I just want to put a file online.
It's like, well, how on earth do I do that?
I can't.
Or I want to put up a static website, so I've got to bring in, I don't know, Netlify, because another service.
>>Yeah, Netlify is really nice for just pure static sites, actually.
Yeah.
>>It is.
It's awesome.
But then all of a sudden, you're running two services, and then you want to do some log analysis.
So you've got to bring in-- it's like, oh, hang on, I've got three services now running.
And it gets a bit out of hand.
So then on the other hand, you've got AWS.
And you go to AWS, and it's like, oh, my word.
>>It's the paradox of choice.
It's just like that and Azure.
I mean, they're both incredibly powerful, but it's just like, oh, my goodness.
Look at this admin dashboard.
Like, there's this huge thing with 50 choices.
I go into one, and it expands into 20.
And then I need to figure out the right one of those 20.
It's just-- it's mind-boggling.
>>Yeah, yeah, exactly.
And so where Button fits in that is it's on AWS, but it provides a simplified environment.
Because it's part tool.
It's a tool to do it, but also a guide that says, look, this is how you should deploy.
So the app puts together the environment for how you should deploy your Django app.
Or you can do any app, but I begin with Django, because that's where obviously what I know.
And then the difference between-- well, why would I use that instead of a platform as
a service like Heroku?
Well, because if you go out of it, it's just AWS.
And so you can go and move on to other things.
>>When you do go closer to-- now you are kind of Google or whatever.
But I mean, obviously, you've got growth not far down that road.
But your little ways you can go, oh, we actually need to do this other thing.
>>Yeah.
And so that's what I'm aiming for.
And that's launching very soon.
It'll be early access by the middle of February.
You know, beta by end of the quarter.
And then, you know, what I call version-- what ends the beta, I don't know, end of the
year, I would imagine.
>>Yeah, yeah.
That sounds really cool.
We'll definitely link to it in the show notes.
When I was pausing there, I said, OK, well, on one end, we have PaaS like Heroku and other
platform as a service options.
What is the other end?
Is the other end Linux virtual machines?
Or is the other end Kubernetes clusters?
>>No, yeah, it's Kubernetes clusters.
It's well beyond virtual machines, right?
To spin up a virtual machine is not a problem.
The problem is that you get a bare OS.
And then you've got to do all the app to get installed to turn it into something you can
deploy on, right?
And then you do that once.
And then the second problem is that six months later, you need to upgrade it.
And you've got to replace that VM.
So that's very difficult.
And I think that's what leads people into this kind of world of containers.
And then into containers, it's like, oh, well, I need an orchestration platform to-- and
that's-- you know, there are people who make a career doing that.
You can't expect to do that.
>>Yeah, I agree with Carlton.
I will say it depends slightly in that, like, so in my professionals book, I show how to
use Docker.
And Docker is for a smaller site, I think actually, you can put your containers online.
So you can-- a lot of different flow is actually quite nice.
But I agree with Carlton's broader point about, you know, that is and all the rest.
>>So I feel like-- sorry, Carlton.
I feel like is the goal I'm setting up a Kubernetes cluster, and I'm running the data layer, and
I'm running the caching layer.
And if you're managing that whole thing in a cluster, you're at the far right end of
the most complicated.
But if I'm going to deploy to a hosted Kubernetes container and consume a database as a service
in a caching tier as a service, then it's-- then it starts to fall back to, well, I just
get my container to run and plug in these connection strings, and we're good to go.
I think there's-- it can kind of live on both sides, honestly.
>>Yeah, I mean, and there's different approaches and different sweet spots for each individual.
The difference for me is you can containerize your application and run it up.
But where do you container that to?
Where do you run that container?
Is that on a set of VMs, which you provisioned yourself and put a container management system
on like Kubernetes?
Or is that on somebody else?
Like, is it basically service, like Cloud Run?
Cloud Run takes your container and runs it, and you don't know anything about where it's
running.
So that's more like a platform as a service again.
>>Yeah, it is.
It falls back in that.
So Will said he's a fan of Heroku.
Carlton, let me ask you this question.
If you were writing an application in Django that was expected to get 5 million data-driven,
like proper requests, not for CSS and whatnot, but proper requests a month, how would you
deploy it right now?
>>I would deploy it on a pretty big VM with as many process workers as I need.
So I'd put stick Nginx as my front end, perhaps I'd probably use something like application
load balancer in front of it, one of these things that AWS will provide or Azure have
got their equivalent load balancer.
Then I'd have my Nginx, which is serving my static files.
Behind that, I'd probably have-
>>It's also doing SSL, for example, right?
Your less than reference.
>>Yeah, yeah.
And they're handling all of the certificate renewals and all of that kind of thing, which
is probably worth the money because it only takes you a few minutes.
But you forget and then your site goes down and just handle that stuff off.
So I'd put that on a nice size VM.
I'd have three, four, five Gunicorn workers serving the application instances, load balanced
behind Nginx.
And then I'd have Postgres on a decent size RDS, which is a managed database service behind
it.
And I would, as a first preference, I would scale up the VM and I would scale up the RDS
rather than-
>>Way before you scale out.
>>Yeah, way before scale out.
>>Yeah, I agree.
>>Yeah, if you get a few money at it, then do it.
>>Yeah.
As soon as you have them scaled out, it gets tricky, right?
It takes you up a notch in that DevOps story.
>>Yeah.
And then you need, at that point, you're hiring an extra hand just to manage the ops, an extra
hand to manage the ops.
And it's like, well, what was the revenue of the application that justified the salary
and the social security of that extra hand?
>>Yeah, I mean, maybe you're like, well, I don't really want to pay for that larger VM
that's $80 a month instead of $10 a month.
But if the alternative is now we spend human hours on making three $10 VMs run, it's so
easy for businesses to become pennywise pound foolish around these kinds of things, right?
It's just like, well, we can't get you a new monitor, a new keyboard.
Really?
You pay me like $80,000 a year and you won't give me a new keyboard to be more productive?
Or I feel like that's the deployment equivalent of that.
>>Yeah, no, it's penny pinching for no reason.
I mean, the other great example is Sentry, right?
So Sentry is your kind of, you log all your errors to it, send your exceptions to it,
and it gives you great stack traces and it links you back to GitHub.
It's awesome.
Why would you not have this?
And then you're on the free account, you know, it gives you 5,000 events a month or something.
And it's like, oh, we need 30 bucks to get onto the like the million events a month.
And the manager's like, no, you can't have paid Sentry.
You're like, what?
What are you talking about?
>>Exactly.
>>You're like, well, we can't log that event because of Sentry.
And then you're blind.
And then your app goes down and you spend four hours trying to work out what it is.
What are you losing business?
Like that was 30 bucks a month for Sentry.
Just pay it.
>>But I think it depends if your manager has felt that pain as an individual contributor
themselves, right?
Because if they haven't, then yeah, stop complaining, developer, you know?
>>Yeah, yeah, exactly.
>>Yeah, you should.
I always thought, I mean, at Quizlet, which is now like half of all high school students,
we had we had a joint, which I was still around their hosting company, but we were having
scaling issues.
They came in and we had the whole team CTO, which was great.
And at the end of the day, they were just like, you need bigger hardware.
You know, if you can get more, you know, as a business person, if you can throw money
at a scaling problem, like, yeah, that's the easiest money you've spent.
>>Yeah.
You know, one thing, what I'm doing right now, Carlton, is I'm running NGINX on Ubuntu,
but I'm using MicroWizky.
And I came across this, you know, although as I'm starting to think about the ASGI stuff,
you know, Gunicorn, Genicorn and like UVicorn worker processes is starting to look like
a really awesome thing.
But what I wanted to point out is there's this great article by the Bloomberg tech folks
talking about configuring MicroWizky for production.
And man, do they have a bunch of good little tips of like, well, here's all these things.
But oh, did you know if you turn on like enable threads versus not, or if you set single interpreter
mode to true, you automatically get better performance because it was configured to potentially
run like Python 3.7 and 3.8 at the same time.
And you're never going to do that in one process, most likely.
And there's just all these really fantastic settings and like vacuum and whatnot, to clean
up sockets and whatnot.
So people if they're running MicroWizky in production, they should absolutely check that
out.
That's a really, I redid a bunch of the way I was doing things after reading that.
Just scroll to the image at the top, if you would please, Michael.
Sure.
Yeah, yeah.
But like, yeah, so that looks almost exactly how I deploy.
Like NGINX, front of a worker process, you know, that's running your Python applications
and you know, talking to your database.
Yeah, exactly.
It's pretty standard.
I got memcached in there, so I'd have Redis instead of memcached, but same deal.
Yeah.
Let me ask you, go ahead Will.
There's a comment about is does EC2 sit between a VPS and, and Kubernetes?
Yeah.
Since you're AWS expert.
Okay, well, I don't know about expert, but I, so on AWS, like you, this is, this is what
I haven't found in AWS.
Like, I would love to love their light sale product, but it just seems totally uncared
where they kind of manage the cluster all for you.
But on the, I can't even remember what the cluster service is called, but you have to
provision the EC2 instances.
And you can do it quite easy.
It's not hard to do, but you have to spin those up and they're kind of your responsibility.
And then it will run the cluster service on top of it, the Kubernetes on top of it.
And then you deploy your containers in there.
This is where something like Cloud Run is a bit easier because you don't have that layer
of I'm provisioning the underlying instances myself.
And you have to choose the size of them and you can scale them up easily enough, but you
know, it's, it's, it's non-trivial to set up a cluster on AWS.
That's always been my feeling as well.
So I feel like you're sort of committed to their hosted services.
And if for some reason you don't want to use them, it's that the step is not a tiny bit
more, it's a bigger, a much bigger step to like, try to rework that.
Yeah.
I mean, the example is right.
You can run your own Postgres on EC2 instances when you know you can provision the disks
and you can do all that rather than RDS.
And for me, I'm like, okay, if you've got a very specialist use case, then yeah, do
that.
Postgres is great.
Just use RDS, just use the hosted service because again, you're saving money and yet
it's a bit more, it's a bit more expensive per hour, but not as expensive as you, your
time, your life force.
Yeah.
Well, I think also it depends, right?
Are you one single person who is building up an idea and you have zero revenue and you're
just trying to do this for two hours a week to see if you can get a little tiny bit of
traction?
Yeah.
Maybe, maybe it is worth an extra five hours versus I have actual money coming in the door
and I'm trading off building this feature or that feature.
Like those are really very different contexts.
Yeah.
And also, also though you get yourself a Raspberry Pi and you can install NGINX on it and Postgres
on it.
And no, but you can run all those, right?
And you can do it locally and you can bet you can run a Apache bench against it and
you, it will serve plenty.
So you can get not the, but yeah, yeah, sure.
But you can get, you can run Postgres is my point.
You don't need RDS to run a small Postgres.
If you're running a slightly bigger one, then yeah, use RDS.
And then if you're a specialist and you really need to customize your Postgres somehow, then
okay.
Yeah.
You know, spin up the EC2, install Postgres on it and customize it to your heart's content.
But that's well beyond my skill level and you know, yeah.
This is why they have hundreds or thousands of employees, right?
Like when people say, why do the big companies do that?
It's like, well, why does Instagram have a thousand, whatever, thousand engineers when
Carlton, you and I could spin up a, you know, a prototype relatively quickly.
It's like, because we're not dealing with the traffic they are.
And so it just gets exponentially harder, which is why you need a lot of people for
all these issues.
Yeah, absolutely.
Will, you mentioned something really interesting there that I would like to just touch on for
a moment.
Okay.
We're getting short on time.
You said you could run SQLite.
Oh, well, so that Carlton has a good story about SQLite.
I mean, about how it's so generally people say, well, you can't use it.
You shouldn't use it at all.
But there are some cases where that's not the case.
I mean, if it's a read heavy application, you can get away with it.
Simon Wilson's doing a lot with data set.
Yeah, yeah.
I just had him on the show.
His episode just came out this week, actually.
Yeah.
So he's great.
And that is such a cool project.
I feel like that is actually an undersold story for the beginners, right?
Because deployment of web application often means deployment of web application plus database
server plus backups of database server plus like all the sudden it goes from 20% to 90%
hard or whatever, right?
Or you go to hosted and you're like, okay, well, I still got to back up that thing potentially.
And there's just, you've got potential migrations.
I don't know.
There's a lot of stuff going on.
And if you can say, well, until you actually get much traffic, you can just say, here's
the DB file and the SQLite connection on the one machine that I have.
And you back up that file every now and then.
That might be a good story.
If the alternative is it's too much for me to get my app out.
Yeah, yeah, no, definitely.
Especially if it's a blog or a content site like a catalog where it's all read only and
you know, maybe you're using the admin to manage the content on it.
If it's only one person using the admin, you're not going to have concurrent rights, which
is the thing about SQLite.
And so it's never going to be an issue.
And it is fast.
It's read only workloads.
It's fast.
It's fast enough.
It's very fast.
Yeah.
And then it's got there's no server for people who don't understand or are not totally aware.
Like it runs.
It comes with Python and it runs in process.
There's no other server to set up and connect to.
Yeah.
So Carlton correct me on that at one point, because I was saying, oh, yeah, no SQLite.
And he was so I have to give credit to Carlton for there are some instances where it can work.
Here's the secret about SQLite.
It's got a writer headlock by a while mode, which means that actually you've got a good
chance of being able to do kind of concurrent rights too.
And if you know that Django's ORM has got a retry value, which if you set that, you
know, you know, a little bit higher, if it if it gets database locked, it will try again
in a second.
And then, you know, you can go quite a long way enabling these things.
And then when you finally in production actually get a database was locked error, then you
could think, you know what, I think it's time.
Yeah, yeah.
In my world, I'm running MongoDB as the database.
And it, it doesn't make sense to consider running that on SQLite.
But I can remember back when I first started deploying it, like, okay, well, I got to learn
Linux, I got to learn Nginx, I got to learn micro WSGI, like, okay, what other deployment
like, how do I have to learn running my database on these things?
There's just, there was a lot and I can definitely see if you could say, well, here's an intermediate
step to get it out and get it going.
And then you just change the connection string at some point over to a big separate server.
You know, I think that's a really good path.
It's a little bit like, you know, raw SQL versus Django models.
This is timely, because I've had a thread emailing with a reader who doesn't quite was
has something in mind.
And he's like, I modeled it all out, the scheme all out in SQL.
And you know, it's like, SQL is easy to learn the basics and really hard to scale.
And while Django lets you write SQL, you really, really, really should resist doing that unless
you're way better programmer than I am.
Whereas before you would have to learn tons of stuff.
Same thing with deployment, you can get a lot of the way there by trusting someone who
says until you need it, don't bother.
The same thing with database stuff, like, okay, you know, do some basic SQL, understand
a little bit of the relations, but that's the power of the Django ORM is that it will
handle so much of this for you.
And if you think you need to go custom, unless you know, if you have any doubts, you shouldn't
do it.
Yeah.
And the migration side, that's a huge part of a challenge if you were maintaining it
yourself.
Yeah, I mean, I was, you know, Andrew, Andrew was responsible for the work, doing most of
that a lot of the async stuff now.
Nice.
All right, guys, we're getting short on time, but I do want to just really quickly cover
one more thing.
Server's up and running, feels like it works.
I watched it all day.
It was fine.
I want to walk away from my desk.
I want to know that it's probably still fine.
And to me, like Carlton, you already talked about one thing.
There's some really great monitoring services that you integrate at the API level.
Like you plug in as a library to your code, Sentry being one of them.
They're really great.
They sponsored the show for a while.
So thanks for that as well.
But I use Sentry on.
Yeah, they're great.
And I've got Sentry running on my apps and every now and then I'll get an email and a
lot of at this point, when I first integrated that type of service, I got a lot of, oh,
I didn't know that was happening.
Oh, crap.
I'm gonna have to fix that.
Lesson is level of logging and stuff, right?
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
But once I kind of dialed in now, it's more like, well, somebody tried to send like some
binary hacky thing that broke the URL parsing, but it's not really a problem.
It's just right.
But having that thing there is really important, I think.
Yes, absolutely.
Absolutely.
Sentry, I just can't see a reason not to use it, even if they've got the free plan.
Why wouldn't you have that?
Yeah, the free tier, once you run out, you can decide whether or not you want to pay
for it.
Yeah, at least get some kind of insight into the errors that are happening.
Yeah.
And then the other thing that I'm a fan of is Prometheus.
It takes a teeny bit of setting up, but again, you can get yourself a Raspberry Pi and you
can play with that locally.
And it's not that hard.
You can put it on your Mac or you put it on your Windows machine, it will run.
But get a Raspberry Pi, set it up, monitor the device.
Prometheus is good fun.
There's a dashboard that goes with it called Grafana.
And then they do a log thing called Locky, which, you know, yeah, you have to configure
it yourself, but it teaches you about your application.
You have to say, okay, I want to monitor this.
And then you can put a little couple of tags in and then, okay, you get metrics then for
that bit.
So, you know, perhaps you've got a slow view.
So one thing you can do is you can put on your Nginx logs, you can log the upstream
response time.
So you've handed off to Garnicorn or to MicroWhiskey and Nginx will then log how long those responses
took.
And then you can say, well, actually, those responses to that particular request is taking
a long time.
And then on that request, you can go into that view and you can add a little, you know,
a little bit of instrumentation and then you can start getting metrics for what that view
is doing.
And yeah, yeah.
>> This is why I want Carlson to build his thing so he can do this for me.
>> He does it for all of you guys.
Yeah.
I'm also a fan of Datadog.
I think those sound pretty similar.
>> Oh, yeah.
They do.
I think they're Boston based actually.
But yeah, they do.
>> Yeah, I think they.
Yeah.
Nice.
>> So this is APM, Application Process Monitoring.
So there's quite a lot of commercial solutions.
And then Prometheus is the sort of DIY.
>> Yeah.
Nice.
>> Equivalent.
>> Okay, cool.
So that's the errors and performance.
The other side is just the website is down.
Right?
So basically, there's so many different layers and moving parts.
For example, we have very little downtime with our train courses and stuff.
But one thing that did happen is we have this thing that will take the main IP address and
switch it to a failover server.
So we can do reboots and patches, and then it'll switch it back.
And that's all done through an API through like a get push, and then it all just sort
of goes down the chain.
Until at one point, there was a bug where that switch of the IP like disassociated it
with either server.
So the server thought it was fine.
It's like, "Whoa, things are chill."
Right?
>> So you log in and it's like, "Yeah."
>> But the site was just timing out or so.
I don't remember what happened, but it wasn't good.
So I think there's some really nice uptime monitoring things that are free that people
should just plug in to go hit these three pages just to see I can talk to the site,
it talks to the database, and answer comes back.
>> Yeah, for sure.
I mean, I've got those configured.
I know we're almost out of time.
I did want to mention on deployment, I think one thing that trips people up, especially
around Django is static files, which is something if you're doing it, you know, VPS, you know,
and I think the key thing is that your server doesn't want to run your static files.
Like it can, there's ways to do it.
But you know, so both within Django, Django out of the box defaults to local settings
and the Django has a local server, they'll just run your static files.
To put that into deployment, you would run collect static, which is a command that makes
a single static file and you probably want to use something like white noise.
But there's a couple steps there.
But something that really sort of intermediate level Django people, it really trips them
up.
I have a blog post on that because I forget the commands.
There's like four things to tweak.
You just have to do every time.
But yeah, it worked locally.
Why doesn't it work live?
And it's like, partly because people don't understand, you know, how their servers working
because they don't have to.
But you know, that's that's I just want to
Yeah, awesome.
Yeah.
That's one of the big four, right?
So get your code in place.
However you do that tarball, git pull, you know, whatever, get it there, configure your
virtual environment, you know, so in pip installed all your requirements, configure your database
and make sure you connect to that and get your static files in place.
That's the
Yeah, and the database is the other one that big, you know, you know, this might call like
beginners, they're like, well, I updated it locally.
And I, I pushed my code.
Why isn't my production database different?
Right?
And it is.
Like, I still occasionally make that mistake, you know, just, but, you know, your code is
not your two separate databases.
Yeah, that's what you want as well is you want you want to be able to write your blog
post in locally.
And then it appear on your server, you don't want to have to go Oh, no, now I have to paste
it into the admin on my remote.
Yeah, it depends how automated you want to go.
I mean, for for a simple like, so my learn Django site, which is basically one admin,
largely a content site.
I mean, in terms of easy peasy, it's just Django.
And I've got cloudflare in front for it's done.
It's super fast.
I get, you know, decent amount of traffic.
I don't have to think about it.
I've got I think I've got pager duty, one of those, you know,
Yeah, that's the one that tells you if it's completely unreachable, right?
Yeah, yeah.
But it's an external one that you know, exactly to your point, because you can't always trust
yourself.
Yeah.
Yeah, there's some interesting ones.
I use status cake.
And it's neat.
But there's some there's some one that I heard the damn beta was told me about that would
sound a lot nicer.
But I'm like, but this one's already set up.
You know, it's not that important.
I get I get notifications if it goes.
But all this stuff, right?
It's like, you know, it's plumbing, right?
Like, I'm happy to learn.
We have the new silver pipes like my bronze pipes.
Fine.
I'm just gonna leave it.
Well, that's well, that's Dr. Carlton's, you know, so
I use DocuLoads.
All right, guys.
Yeah.
All right.
All the time all the time.
All right, let's, let's just wrap it up really quick.
There's a Django newsletter.
I learned about that.
That's interesting.
Yeah, that exists.
Yeah, so that's something I run with Jeff triplet, who's a partner at RevSys.
He's a Python board member.
Very involved with Django.
So Django dash news.com.
There wasn't a regular Django newsletter.
There wasn't a podcast.
So he and I have been doing that for a little over a year and has projects, articles.
I sort of wish someone else did it so I didn't have to do it.
But yeah, we got a lot of people listening, using it.
So that's a good resource for the community.
Fantastic.
All right.
So before I let you two out of here, final two questions really quick.
Will, I'll go with you first.
Okay.
Notable PyPI package out there that you were like, Oh my gosh, I ran across this the other
day.
I can't believe it.
Ah, that's a good question.
I'll go back to an original, an old school one, which I think is bleach, because I've
been thinking about a course on forms.
And bleach is, is a Python one, not Django specific, but you pretty much always want
to have that added.
So Django is very much for user input to make sure there's no like cross site scripting
type stuff.
Yeah.
So that's, okay.
Top of mind.
Not a new one, but I think, you know, along with white noise, you just got to use it.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Carlton has something.
Yeah, no, the, well, the one that's just really captured my imagination recently is rich,
which is the, yeah, rich is cool.
The, the library for creating basically nice terminal output, nice console output.
But it has like tables and all sorts of stuff.
Yeah.
But like, it's got this inspect functionality where you can get an L and you're, you're
sitting there and you're in the shell and you're like, I want to see it.
And you print it and you get it and you, you look at the dict and it's all, it's not.
And then you go inspect and rich formats, this thing where it's like, Oh yeah, I can
look here and I can see exactly what's going on and it's just amazing.
Yeah.
20,000.
That's what I love about coding, right?
I had never heard of this before and it's clearly a very established thing.
Yeah.
Well, I think it's pretty new, but it's very, it's, it's taken off quite, yeah, it's about
a year old.
It's taken off quite steeply and it's a adoption.
One that I ran across really recently, just throw it out there cause it's a Django semi
related one is disk cache.
Have you guys heard of that?
No.
So it's a really interesting caching plugin that will, instead of using memory for
caching, it will store it on to local disk.
Cause usually I have way more hard drive space than you have memory in the cloud and it plugs
into Django to like be a stand in for the cache there.
Okay, fine.
Yeah.
I mean, I'm a big fan of file cache.
General is like memory's expensive, right?
So memory caches is the best way and Redis and memcache are good ways of doing that all
in memory.
And then you think, I just want to generate some HTML once and then just pipe it off the
hard disk.
Exactly.
To me, this is a kind of the equivalent of SQL lite versus a real database.
It's like, you don't need Redis or memcache or something like completely set up just like
until it gets beyond whatever.
Anyway, it's, it's, it looks pretty interesting.
Um, all right.
And then,
I love how you do packages things by the way, like we, we include packages every week in
Django news and there's also like an awesome Django repo that Jeff and I do.
Um, you know, cause the problem is you want some degree of curation, right?
Like something new, but like legit enough to be worth looking at.
Yeah, absolutely.
Thanks.
Yeah, that's very cool.
All right.
And then final question, if you're gonna write some Python code, what editor do you
use?
VS code.
Same for both of us.
Yeah.
Right.
Well, you're still, well, I have to, yes.
VS code.
Very nice.
Um, use it a lot.
Also though, I'd still like BB edit.
Yeah.
Right on.
I mean, I'm just keeping it old school every now and then just for a little nostalgia.
I'll tell you what, right.
So I'm using VS code and I'm like, but I need to do some transformations or I need to, you
know, do a multi file search and a diff here and VS code school, that stuff.
It's a bit, you know, this is built in JavaScript, whereas, you know, BB it's a native Mac app
and it's got a lot going for it.
What do you use?
I use PyCharm.
Although I did.
Yeah.
I'm a big fan.
Um, local company here in Portland panic came out with, I said, called Nova.
I think it's Nova.
They just came out with a brand new editor.
It looks pretty interesting as well.
Yeah.
What was your FTP?
They have, yeah, they make sense.
Transmit.
I love transmit.
Yeah.
I use it all the time.
All the time.
Yeah.
They make great stuff.
We were talking about Nova.
Fantastic.
Cool.
All right, gentlemen, thank you so much for being on the show.
Um, yeah.
It's been great and thanks for all the work on Django and I'll catch up with you all soon.
All right.
Thanks for having us.
Thanks for joining us.
Bye bye.
Thanks everyone for listening as well on the live stream and, yeah, I'll stop the